# Defiant Memory and the Infrastructure of Intimacy: The Thriving Homes of Māori Jews in Aotearoa, New Zealand (Hadas Ore 2018)

[zotero](zotero://select/items/@ore2018)

## Resumen

Social research since the 1980s demonstrates the resurgence of interest in whakapapa and growing recognition in the importance of whānau for the affirmation of being Māori in contemporary Aotearoa, New Zealand. Analysing memories of home, this paper integrates the latest development in the theory of home and nostalgia with empirical data from social psychology on the well-being of contemporary Māori Jews. The data is based on open-end, in-depth interviews with twenty-one Māori Jews between the ages of eighteen and sixty-seven years old, highlighting relationship with whakapapa through funerary practices and food. It demonstrates that contemporary Māori Jews express longing for home and intimacy as well as ambivalence, pain and grief as they critique home. In their lived relationships with whakapapa the Māori Jews in this study employ defiant memory to resist the intergenerational racial tension within their whānau. In this way, they constitute their infrastructure of intimacy and ameliorate their well-being.

## Contexto

Este artículo de Hadas Ore explora la identidad y el bienestar de los judíos maoríes en Aotearoa, Nueva Zelanda, a través de entrevistas en profundidad con 21 individuos. Se centra en cómo la memoria desafiante, un concepto que integra la nostalgia y la resistencia, les permite lidiar con la tensión racial intergeneracional dentro de sus familias (whānau). El estudio analiza cómo las prácticas funerarias (tangihanga) y la comida (kai) funcionan como infraestructuras de intimidad, reforzando los lazos familiares y la conexión con su whakapapa (genealogía y sistema de conexiones). Finalmente, el artículo argumenta que la reafirmación de su identidad dual maorí-judía, a pesar de las experiencias de racismo, contribuye a su bienestar personal y colectivo, desafiando las desigualdades sistémicas.

## Notas

<!--El libro se estructura en-->

<!--Estructura conceptual:-->

<!--Argumentos generales:-->

